From Hanselman, it started calm
it's Hansel minutes, a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number 97. Recorded live
Monday, January 14th, 2008. Support for Hansel
minutes is provided by Telerik
rad controls, the most comprehensive
suite of components for windows
forums and asp.net web applications.
online@wwwdottelerik.com. In this episode, Scott
talks with Sean Wildermuth about
ato.net services, AKA project. The
story. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman and this is another
episode of Hansel minutes. And
this week we'll be talking
about ado.net data services, formerly
project code named Estoria. And
we're talking today with community
member, ado, guy and all
around database brilliance, Sean Wildermuth.
How are you, sir? I'm
good. How are you? I'm
pretty good. It's fine. It's
good to finally get you
on the show. You've been
on DNR a couple of
times and we always hang
out at the conferences, but
haven't had you on the
show. This is a show
97. Now that's amazing. 97
shows. Really. You're helping us
here on the March to
show 100. And what do
you have planned for show
100? I don't know. That's
a good question. Probably a,
a, an introspective retrospective with
a lot of sappy music
and maybe some, maybe a
bloopers show. I don't, I
thought it was a good
question. So you and I
have been talking on, on
the email recently about a
story on project Historia, which
was released with the, the
asp.net three, five extensions, but
isn't explicitly an asp.net three
five thing. And before it
was kind of a, it
was an internal research project,
wasn't it? Well, I don't
know about internal before. It
was a released as ado.net
data services. It was kind
of released to the community
is, Hey, look at this,
tell us if it's interesting
or not. There were some
regional demonstrations of it and
you can kind of play
with the bits to see
what the data team was
up to and kind of
this rest space. Okay. So
let's, let's back up for
a second. Cause not every,
not every listener will know
what rest means, although they
probably have heard the term
rest. I know what it
means. Tell, tell me what
is rest well, rest is
really just a, it stands
for representation, representational, state transfer
of the idea of, or
an Earl based API instead
of a soap based API
for things like web services,
where I can execute a,
a request over HTTP, usually
in a single Earl, that
includes all the information about
the data I want to
come back in a lot
of ways. It's a more
simple representation then soap. It
doesn't have, you know, semantics
for doing some really, for
doing deep levels of security
or, you know, for, I
would like to go to
this place and get this
information or post this information
or whatever the case may
be. The early on in
the, in the soap discussion
in web services, there were
kind of two camps. The
rest camp that thought soap
was too complicated. And so
camp that thought that rest
wasn't mature enough. And I
don't know if that ever
got resolved. Now, rest was
originally a guy's PhD thesis,
and there are a lot
of people who are feel
very strongly about rest as
a, from a purity perspective.
I think Don box calls
them rest of our ans
that, that if it's something
that is POCs P O
X or plain old XML,
where I visit a URL
and some XML comes back,
or I post something to
a URL and something happens
that that's not necessarily a
representation of rest, no pun
intended. Sure. I think it
isn't, isn't it important that
rest lean on some of
the existing HTTP verbs because
there's get and there's posts,
but there's also a whole
series of other verbs that
are not often used and
people who feel very strongly
about rest, usually want those
verbs to have meaning, Is
that correct? To the best
of my knowledge, I'm certainly
not arrest of firing. And
I haven't been in that
camp much. What I do
see is that using all,
all the verbs and really
the four verbs that most
people seem to be most
passionate about are actually obviously
post and get, but also
put and delete which interest
interestingly map very well to
the four verbs and crud
for data access create update
incidentally, Right? Create, read, update,
delete. Yeah, read. I was
missing one of them. There's
this, there's this discussion about
rest, but let's move more
to the pragmatic. If I
understand correctly here that people
who, who initially are exposed
to ado.net data services, they
think that they check a
box and then your database
is available via web services.
I'm sure that's an oversimplification.
Is that what we're talking
about? Inaccurate to say that
because really what, what a
story it does is allows
you to take some data
model, whether that is entity
framework based or in the
bits that should be coming
soon, they've promised to give
us a link for SQL
based data models and then
expose them over rest or
over, over the web. So
it's not about taking the
objects that are in your
database, but the objects that
you use normally in.net code
and then exposing them via,
via a web interface. Okay.
So a lot of people
think about the coopertition that
happens at Microsoft. The idea
that this team is cooperating,
but also competing with this
other team. And they wonder
sometimes there a master plan.
And sometimes I think that
there's a master plan and
otherwise, other times I think
that people are just doing
the best they can to
come up with cool stuff.
And I was initially kind
of suspicious about this project.
And I was thinking, how
is this good idea? You
know, is this going to
compete with LinkedIn SQL or
compete with entity framework? And
sometimes people think that link
to SQL and entity framework
are competing with each other,
but you brought up a
really interesting point that while
linked to SQL might allow
you to see more of
the physical aspects of your
database. If you have a
product table, you might end
up with products, objects, the
entity framework provides you with
a layer of abstraction, right?
That gives you a, a
logical data model that it
may very well be different
from what's going on in
the database. Correct. And, and
also provide a abstraction between
changes of the database and
what memory objects you're using
in the in.net code traditionally.
So then the ado.net data
services or project extort can
sit on currently on the
entity framework, but in the
future, on the near future
on top of linked to
SQL as well, it's a
layer on top of both
of those, Correct. In fact,
the, what they have publicly
said is that it should
be able to be, to
sit on top of any
queryable data source. So you
can imagine any link for
SQL enabled, I'm sorry, any
linkable objects, so that if
you took a M L
V gen pro, if you
took the link for Amazon
stuff, you could throw a
story on top of all
of that. Hmm, interesting. So
even though it's called ado.net
data services, it's not tied
to ado. You could use
any data source, whether it
be a file or a
web service or something that
can be used to be
a link. You use the
term, I queriable being an
interface that you have to
implement in order to be
involved in a link query.
So then anything that I
have that can be involved
in a link query could
then be exploited with the
ado.net data services. That's on
their roadmap. That isn't the
way it quite works today.
But my understanding is that's
the way it will work
by release. Okay. So then
you think about what are
some of the other things
I could serialize this, that
I might not want to
necessarily serialize it as XML,
I might want to serialize
it as, as Jason, as
JavaScript object notation. Can I,
can I do that as
well? You can. And in
fact, they've taken kind of
an interesting approach there. The
current bits that are out
there today actually see realizing
only two formats, Jason, and
I'm an XML representation that
is actually based on Adam.
It's not an old actually,
I don't know what that
stands for. It's a syndication
format similar to RSS, Right?
I don't think Adam actually
stands for anything. I think
that's Sam, those guys just
made the name and it
fits, it's not RSS. It's
an, it's a syndication format.
It is a syndication format.
And again, on the roadmap
is they're looking at whether
to support plain old XML,
as well as this early
serialization format. So you can
think about with kind of
the Ajax ossification of the
web in the last few
years and how hot that
was. If had data sitting
somewhere in your backend, some
of your services that you
wanted to be able to
get at from the client,
from whether it's an Ajax,
whether it's a rich client
like us, silver light, or
even, even flash or flex.
The idea here is that
you can make simple web
requests up and get data
back. Now, the important part
about the way a story
is different than this is,
it's really talking about exposing
end endpoints. So let's say
if I had a product
end point, instead of saying,
I'm going to expose a
web service method that says,
get products by date or
get products for this customer,
or get products from this
supplier. And what's happened in
the web service space is
people often have had to
create and pollute their API
layer with lots of different
calls, for very specific reasons.
The story, it takes a
different approach, whereas the Earl
or the URI syntax allows
you to specify how you
want to get the data.
So we have this product's
end point. And I may
say in my actual Earl
call, I want the products.
And I want the products
who has a stock less
than five, whose price is
greater than this, order it
by this et cetera, and
even shape the result sets
by asking for, to get,
you know, nested objects as
well. Right? So instead of
you know, this idea of
exposing specific calls or specific
queries out, it's really about
exposing part of your model
out, so that developers using
this from the client can
really get at the kind
of data they need. Okay.
So my initial, as you
were saying, this, my initial
fear was like, okay, now
we're allowing ad hoc sequel.
And when they can just
type it in directly to
your URL, into the address
bar, which I suppose could
be a scenario, but I'm
hearing that there are a
whole series of access management
techniques that would allow you
to expose some of the
options for parameters within a
query, but not ad hoc
queries. I mean, I might
be able to say, give
me order IDs where the
order is this ID or
that ID. But that doesn't
mean just because I can
go and query for any
order ID that I could
potentially start querying for customers
or quoting for products. I
have control over what's going
on By default. It doesn't
expose anything from your model.
And as you design your
story of service or you're
a data services layer, it's,
it's a fairly simple thing
to allow or disallow, both
verbs and nouns. So I
want to expose the products
from my model, but not
the customers. I want to
expose reading, but not writing.
I want to expose updating,
but not inserting things like
that. Now, is this something
that I will be running
on my web server? I
mean, I think that this,
okay, so this is not
something running on SQL server.
No it's running on the
web server because you're occurring
against the model, not against
the database. The fact that
that model becomes a database
call is a side effect,
but it's not, you know,
if you can imagine a
story over link for Amazon,
what's really going to happen
in the background is it's
going to generate a call
to Amazon, not at some
database query. So you're not
putting in, you know, I'm
at hoc sequel, you're putting
in a, this query language
that a story has come
up with to allow you
to look at these items.
It's not generate, it's not
allowing you to put, you
know, straight SQL and, and
putting it in. So you
don't have any of the
problems of, you know, SQL
injection attacks and that sort
of thing. That makes sense.
So definitely it was a
lot of kind of fun,
a lot of fear, uncertainty
and doubt around those words.
It was like, well, you
turn on, you install this
on your SQL server. This
is all not true. Install
this on your SQL server,
push a button and then
everything's available and you can
query it with the browser.
Yeah, We had that. It
was called SQL XML. And
was it a horribly bad
idea that Exactly. So we
install this on our web
server and we, everything is
turned off by default. So
all access to the data
store is turned off. We
can go and initialize our
service and decide what resources
and what access rules we
want. I understand that there's
the notion of containers. So
you can partition your logical
data model and decide what,
what people have access to
and decide which entry point
into the system that you
want to grant access to.
Correct. And then if I
was going to write an
application like a console application,
that would start talking to
it, just like I make
in link to a SQL,
like maybe a North wind
data context, I guess, in,
in a story, I make
a web data context and
then just start talking to
it, like, like any linkable
thing. Well, there's two approaches
here. There is a client
side library and there's one
for, you know, rich clients
that full.net applications. There's also
one for Silverlight that was
just released. That is still
a bit influx where you
have that notion of context.
You know, the other thing
you also have is it's
just a web call, right?
And so if you ended
up wanting to manage it
yourself, you're just getting data
and you just wanted to
work with, from Java script,
you can just execute web
requests. It's, it's not limited
to simply using their library.
Their library certainly makes it
easier, but when it gets
closer to the metal, it
is just a web request
that returns Jason or XML.
So as someone who thinks
about things, kind of in
a larger architectural context myself,
I always wonder, well, is
this the data access layer?
I mean, ordinarily, I would
write that, that layer, and
then we'd have this translation
between what's coming out of
the database. And what I
would think of as a
business object, right? More and
more people are using DTS
data transfer objects, which don't
have any, any smarts. They're
not some of the smart
business objects of the, of
the nineties, right? I'm wondering
these entities that are being
moved around as they, as
a, you know, who is
calling this is it, my
business logic is calling my
yesterday a rest service. Is
it my data? Is this
replacing my data access layer?
I don't think so, because
I think, I think the
fact that there's a library
for smart clients is more
for the remote smart client
story. It's not for the
traditional enterprise development. You would
still use your, the business
objects you've always used, and
whether they were generated with
something like LinkedIn SQL the
entity framework, indoc, or LGB
LLB, gen pro, or whatever
the tool was you're using.
Those are still going to
be your business objects in
memory. This is allowing you
to be able to have
access to the same set
of business objects across the
internet. And that's the important
thing. Okay. So this is
about providing access over the
net in the, in the
format that people are now
comfortable with, you know, rest
and Jason and angle brackets.
But this is not necessarily
turning my database access layer
on its ear. If I've
already got a good layer,
this would allow me to
explore that a little more,
but I don't need to,
it's not implying that there's
a new way to do
things entirely on the data
access layer that I should
throw away. Let me put
it this way. That's the
way, that's what I believe
now, as we hear, see
Microsoft guys out of the
data team demo, this, you
may hear a different story,
but I really think the
way they've architected, this is
really about, I've already got
my data. I've got my
data objects that I'm using
in my traditional dotnet development,
my traditional enterprise development, where
we're all in the same
domain, we're all in the
same building sometimes, or maybe
in the same VPN, but
I'd like to be able
to expose some of that
data out to partner sites
or out to customer sites.
And typically I've written a
couple of web pages to
do that. And I'd like
to take my existing data
and then have a way
to transport it across the
internet across 80 or, or
a four 43 and just
make it work. Okay. So
now people may be wondering,
how does this relate to
WCF and to what was
formerly called Indigo? And is
this, is this competing with,
with WCF? It's actually not,
it's actually built on top
of the WCF 3.5 rest
stack. So the reading their
own dog food, this isn't
a whole new invention. They're
using that stuff to actually
build this Well, that's refreshing.
Yeah, it is actually, I
mean, I guess I'm not
supposed to say that as
an employee of the company,
but it's like, Oh, that's
nice. Yeah. It's actually built
on something that we'd already
done W which is, which
is good because a lot
of the same semantics, they're
very comfortable when you look
at, you know, you're looking
at SVC and points, you
can configure them with traditional
WCF, but if you're using
this story of stuff, it
is kind of drop go.
You end up developing a
single class where you write
a little bit of code
that says, I have this
model. These are the parts
of the model I want
to expose. These are the
verbs for the model I
want to expose and you're
done. Okay. So this is
plugging into that WCF rest
stuff. Then it's just using
web service host. And then
it would probably make the
contract that you'd have that
rest endpoint, just a URI
template star. And then a
story. The ado.net data services
would then be allowed to
decide what to do about
that URI. So it looks
like they've generated their own,
not generated. They've designed their
own kind of URI to,
to match what makes them
comfortable. That's my understanding. And
that has over the original
CTP and through the, this
latest version that has morphed
a little as they found
out that it works better
or worse with Firefox or
with IIE or with some
of the other browsers. So
the syntax has been changing
a little over the CTPs
to try to get it
right. There's also some discussion
about, you know, under Firefox
delete and put aren't treated
as first class citizens like
postings are and how to
get around those facts. But
the story is really trying
to handle that underneath the
covers for you. Yeah. I
understand that. Getting those kinds
of things through firewalls, getting
anything other than get her
posts through a firewall also
can be a real challenge.
Yeah. Yeah. And I'm not,
I'm not sure what, where
that will actually get to
or where they'll actually handle
that. Whether everything will be
a post with, you know,
special monikers or what I
think that's something they're still
delving into to try to
determine the best way to
do it. I got most
interested in this because it
seemed like the natural place
to get data for silver
light, because I'm more interested
in the line of business
app story of silver light
than I am the video
player. And being able to
get data from my, from
my servers. You know, when
I'm doing traditional asp.net, I
can, you know, create markup
with HTML and then ship
it out to the server
because I have access to
that from the client because
silver lights written really in
the client space, in the
browser, it's been a challenge,
you know, do you write
a web service for each
and every call? Do you
want to do? It's been
a real compliment to that
as far as I'm concerned.
So this is very good.
This is helping me get,
put this into context because
I was like, what is
this for? What is this
competing with? How has this
complimentary? But it seems if
you're, if you're going to
be doing a lot of
Ajax applications and which means
that you are going to
be exposing a lot of
data on the web, anyway,
this is a really good
choice for getting that data
out. Especially if you have
existing models. Yes. Right. If
you're gonna be using the
same models, I mean, certainly
we have, and one could
be using this, doing this
manually. You can make an
ASM X web service, and
you could expose that as
a, as Jason, you could
do all of this manually
with HTP handlers. But if
you have a good understanding
of what your model looks
like, and you feel comfortable
exposing that, kind of, that,
that mindset, you know, your,
the way you've modeled your
data out to your, to
the web, then this is
a very minimal, minimally difficult
way to do this. I
mean, you install some bits
on your web server, you
pointed at your database, and
then there's a client library
either for.net clients or for
Silverlight that hide the fact
that you're using HTTP. And
then you start querying it.
One of the, one of
the more difficult one I've
talked about this in front
of groups at MSDN events
and such one of the
big questions is, well, how
secure is it? Well, you
know, the reality is you're
bringing data into the client,
which means it's not secure
regardless of the transport mechanism.
If you're bringing in social
security numbers from your employees
and putting them in the
browser, I can look with
a memory profile in three
minutes and see what date
is there a I can't
hack up the JavaScript, whatever
it is. So you still
need to be careful about
what data you're going to
expose via story, because you're
still talking about code that's
running in the client's machine.
And if you don't want
people to look at that
data, you should still be
using the server. You know,
let's say you wanted to
find out the total sales
for our sales department. You're
not going to drop down
all the sales people's information
into the browser, and then
do all the calculations to
show some graph. You're going
to present summary data down
to the browser for a
number of reasons, right? Cause
you're not, I mean, like
you're not exposing you don't
you have control over what
gets exposed. I mean, you're
not like face people don't
freak out because Facebook has
an arrest API. I mean,
you can call Facebook's API
yourself and you can fool
around with the URI and
you can start pulling data
back out of Facebook, but
they're not concerned that you're
going to bring the system
down by doing ad hoc
queries, because, because you can't
do ad hoc queries, correct.
You can get to what
they've chosen to let you
get to via the URI
and nothing else. And this
story is the same with
the story. Yeah. Okay. So
we've got linked to rest
now Sort of, sort of
the it's kind of link
on both ends, which is
kind of the weird part,
because if you wanted to
expose your own sorts of
even verbs, let's say you
wanted to actually implement something
like, you know, get data
that retrieved some very specific,
you know, generated code. You
would still, as far as
the story is concerned, you
would still expose that as
a linkable or an I
query of all interface at
the end so that the
client library is going to
let you do link over
the results. But at the
other end of the wire,
a story is having you
do linked to return, you
know, really a query across
the wire. I see, I
see the serialization format is
what it is, but we've,
we'll be doing link to
the local data on the
client side. And then we
may or may not be
using link on the, on
the end. Actually the reverse
you will be using link
on the backend. You may
or may not be using
it on the cloud. Yeah,
actually, right. Forgive me. You're
absolutely right. Obviously link for
JavaScript is a couple of
weeks away, so, Oh really?
No, I'm kidding. I don't
know when link will work
in Java script. Well, you
know, it's amazing what you
can get down in JavaScript.
It's pretty much blown my
mind. I mean, just when
I just, when I thought
you couldn't do XYZ, someone
writes a complete version of
solitaire entirely and JavaScript. Sure.
So yeah, if it can
be done in JavaScript, I'm
sure that somebody will do
it. Yeah. That, you know,
that could start a whole
different discussion. We could have
on a whole nother experimental
project, but I'll leave that
to another talk. Oh, okay.
Well the little teaser there.
Well, I really appreciate you
taking the time out of
your day to come and
talk to us and I'll
put links to your blog
and up to Mike Glasgow's
blog and the different folks
over on Estoria. And if
you've got any samples or
anything cool that you want
people to see if you
put a post up in
your blog for me, Sean,
and I will link to
it. Sure. I'd also suggest
people link to or visit
Silverlight data.com, which is a
little experimental site. I have
it's silver light using a
story to show database data,
and you can link to
the in download the complete
example. I like examples. Source
code is good. Yep. Well,
thanks for having me. Cool.
Well, thanks so much for
taking the time. And this
has been another episode of
Hansel minutes. We'll see you
again next week.